Cpp Interop exercise (#157)
ferrous-systems/rust-exercises: exercise-book/src/cpp-interop.md

## Prerequisites

- FFI
- Some knowledge of C/C++

This exercise does not require writing vast amounts of Rust code, but does require understanding how different parts of the build system in Rust and C++ interact to get the project going.

## Tasks

1. Use `autocxx` to develop bindings to a `rapidcsv.h` and print out the dates in `example.csv`, from within Rust as well as the `RowCount`.

You should get:

```console
6
2017-02-24
2017-02-23
2017-02-22
2017-02-21
2017-02-17
```

Because there are 5 rows of data and a header row.

2. Use `autocxx` to read `weather.csv` and report average temperature in June:

```console
1.1999999999999995
```

A full solution is available at `rust-exercises/exercises-solutions/cpp-interop`.

## Knowledge

We will learn to use `autocxx` to interface Rust and C++, a usually onerous affair.

Modern C++ dependencies can have exceptions, their own heap, variadic templates, generic parameters and all sorts of functionality that is hard to interface with.

`autocxx` helps us automate this bridge, up to a point, and we'll see how to overcome its limitations and understand where they come from.

> To get started, we've provided a header-only C++ library called [rapidcsv](https://github.com/d99kris/rapidcsv) inside `rust-exercises/exercise-templates/cpp-interop` that can load and process CSV files.

Author: ```suggestion
To get started, we'll download a header-only C++ library called [rapidcsv](https://github.com/d99kris/rapidcsv) inside `rust-exercises/exercise-templates/cpp-interop` that can load and process CSV files.
```

`autocxx` works by inspecting the declared data structures  in `rapidcsv.h` and generating the necessary methods and types from the Rust side.

The types and methods for `rapidcsv::Document`, the main data type that holds a CSV, can be generated with

```rust [], ignore
autocxx::include_cpp! {
    #include "wrapper.h"
    generate!("rapidcsv::Document")
    safety!(unsafe_ffi)
}
```

### build.rs

In order to setup `autocxx`, one needs a `src/build.rs` script that will regenerate the necessary bindings on each `cargo build` invocation if `main.rs` changed.

We've taken a very basic script from the `autocxx` repo and dropped it into `src/build.rs`.

`build.rs` files are scripts that are run before the rest of your program, and we'll use it to link with 3rd party code dependencies.

### CxxStrings

We'll define `CxxStrings` with the use of the handy macro

```rust [], ignore
let_cxx_string!(file_name = "example.csv");
```

> which comes with `cxx`. This can become a very painful constructor otherwise since we'd have to turn our Rust strings into `CxxStrings` for opening a file with a C++ method, so this is very handy.

Author: ```suggestion
which comes with `cxx`. This can become a very painful constructor otherwise since we'd have to turn our Rust strings into `CxxStrings` for opening a file with a C++ method, so this is very handy.

Note that converting these to `&str`s uses at most a fat pointer as overhead, but incurs no further memory allocation on the string object itself.
```

This is because `autocxx` (nor any tool, probably) can't concretize generic parameters in the general case, so we need to specify a concrete type signature we will be using:

```c++
#include "rapidcsv.h"

namespace my_csv {
    rapidcsv::Document open_csv(const std::string& pPath) {
        return rapidcsv::Document(pPath);
    }
}
```

Note that we even have access to namespaces!

This trick is also useful for dealing with the `rapidcsv::Document` C++ constructor that have many default parameters:

```c++
explicit Document(const std::string& pPath = std::string(),
                  const LabelParams& pLabelParams = LabelParams(),
                  const SeparatorParams& pSeparatorParams = SeparatorParams(),
                  const ConverterParams& pConverterParams = ConverterParams(),
                  const LineReaderParams& pLineReaderParams = LineReaderParams())
```

`autocxx` does not pick up on the `rapidcsv::Document` constructor having all these default parameters.

> If we didn't do the wrapper trick, we'd have to define each of those `xxxParams()` objects separately and pass it into each constructor.

Author: ```suggestion
If we didn't do the wrapper trick, we'd have to define each of those `xxxParams()` objects separately and pass it into each constructor call.
```

    let doc = ffi::my_csv::open_csv(&file_name).within_unique_ptr();
    let count = doc.GetRowCount();
    println!("{count}");
    for i in 0..count {
        let date = doc.get_string_cell(0, i);
        println!("{}", date);
    }
}

trait GetStringCell {
    fn get_string_cell(&self, column: usize, row: usize) -> UniquePtr<CxxString>;
}

impl GetStringCell for Document {
    fn get_string_cell(&self, column: usize, row: usize) -> UniquePtr<CxxString> {
        ffi::my_csv::get_string_cell(self, column, row)
    }
}
```

</details>

### Filter for June dates and process

<details><summary> Solution Task 2 </summary>

```rust [], ignore
use autocxx::prelude::*;
use cxx::{let_cxx_string, CxxString};
use ffi::rapidcsv::Document;

autocxx::include_cpp! {
    #include "wrapper.h"
    generate!("rapidcsv::Document")
    generate!("my_csv::open_csv")
    generate!("my_csv::get_string_cell")
    safety!(unsafe_ffi)
}

fn main() {
    let_cxx_string!(file_name = "weather.csv");
    let doc = ffi::my_csv::open_csv(&file_name).within_unique_ptr();
    let count = doc.GetRowCount();
    let mut june_temps = 0.0;
    for i in 0..count {
        let date = doc.get_string_cell(0, i);

>         // Convert to Rust string - with additional memory overhead

Author: ```suggestion
        // Convert to Rust str - with type-guaranteed no additional memory overhead
```

# Cpp Interop Exercise

## After completing this exercise you will be able to

- use `autocxx` to deal with C++ data types from Rust in a header-only library
- write your own thin wrappers for C++ functions with default parameters
- be able to call template C++ functions from Rust with `autocxx`

## Prerequisites

- FFI
- Some knowledge of C/C++

This exercise does not require writing vast amounts of Rust code, but does require understanding how different parts of the build system in Rust and C++ interact to get the project going.

## Tasks

1. Use `autocxx` to develop bindings to a `rapidcsv.h` and print out the dates in `example.csv`, from within Rust as well as the `RowCount`.

You should get:

```console
6
2017-02-24
2017-02-23
2017-02-22
2017-02-21
2017-02-17
```

Because there are 5 rows of data and a header row.

2. Use `autocxx` to read `weather.csv` and report the average temperature in June, which should be approximately

```console
1.20
```

> A full solution is available at `rust-exercises/exercises-solutions/cpp-interop`.

Reviewer: Maybe we should expand the tasks section? Give a list of steps to follow within each point to give people a plan to follow?

Author: I've expanded both sections now. Care to review for phrasing please?
